SIP002 purposed a new URI scheme, following [RFC3986](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt):

```
SS-URI = "ss://" userinfo "@" hostname ":" port [ "/" ] [ "?" plugin ] [ "#" tag ]
userinfo = websafe-base64-encode-utf8(method  ":" password)
           method ":" password
```

Note that encoding `userinfo` with Base64URL is recommended but optional for Stream and AEAD ([SIP004](https://github.com/shadowsocks/shadowsocks-org/issues/30)). But for AEAD-2022 ([SIP022](https://github.com/shadowsocks/shadowsocks-org/issues/196)), `userinfo` MUST NOT be encoded with Base64URL. When `userinfo` is not encoded, `method` and `password` MUST be percent encoded.

The last `/` should be appended if plugin is present, but is optional if only tag is present. Example: `ss://YmYtY2ZiOnRlc3Q@192.168.100.1:8888/?plugin=url-encoded-plugin-argument-value&unsupported-arguments=should-be-ignored#Dummy+profile+name`. This kind of URIs can be parsed by standard libraries provided by most languages.

For plugin argument, we use the similar format as `TOR_PT_SERVER_TRANSPORT_OPTIONS`, which have the format like `simple-obfs;obfs=http;obfs-host=example.com` where colons, semicolons, equal signs and backslashes MUST be escaped with a backslash.

Examples:

With user info encoded with Base64URL:

* `ss://YWVzLTEyOC1nY206dGVzdA@192.168.100.1:8888#Example1`
* `ss://cmM0LW1kNTpwYXNzd2Q@192.168.100.1:8888/?plugin=obfs-local%3Bobfs%3Dhttp#Example2`

Plain user info:

* `ss://2022-blake3-aes-256-gcm:YctPZ6U7xPPcU%2Bgp3u%2B0tx%2FtRizJN9K8y%2BuKlW2qjlI%3D@192.168.100.1:8888#Example3`
* `ss://2022-blake3-aes-256-gcm:YctPZ6U7xPPcU%2Bgp3u%2B0tx%2FtRizJN9K8y%2BuKlW2qjlI%3D@192.168.100.1:8888/?plugin=v2ray-plugin%3Bserver#Example3`

FAQ:

Q1: Why parse user info to Base64URL?

A1: To safely encode all the characters in the key string. Note that we never try to "encrypt" your key in the URI.

Q2: Why not parse host name and port number into Base64URL?

A2: As mentioned above, we never try to "encrypt" anything in the URI. Additional parsing of host name and port number is not necessary.

Q3: Why not every client supports SIP002 URI scheme?

A3: Currently, SIP002 is still an optional feature unless the client supports SIP003 plugin.

Q4: Why the tags with space is truncated?

A4: White space is not legal in URI. It should be escaped. For example, `ss://...#shadowsocks server 1` (illegal URI) should be escaped into `ss://...#shadowsocks%20server%201` (legal URI).